---
title: "SOFAR receiver at Grand Turk Island.”
mathjax: true
layout: post
categories: media
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

The SOFAR float program took its first steps in 1966. Doug’s challenge was to develop the float and my task was to implement the float tracking system. What made this arrangement so attractive was that we had permission to use existing Broad Ocean Area SOFAR hydrophones that were in use to determine the splash-down point of missiles launched from Cape Canaveral. This allowed us to focus most of our energies on the float development. My task was straightforward, to install preamplifiers, filters, and digital data recorders, originally using at first 7-track, later 9-track computer-grade magnetic tape. We initially planned to install receivers in Bermuda, Eleuthera, Puerto Rico, and Antigua. But there were issues with the Antigua site (and it was distant) and the Bermuda phone was shadowed toward the west. There was a hydrophone at Grand Turk Island (GTI) but we couldn’t use it. So, we proposed and received funding from NSF to install our own hydrophone at GTI. 
<!--more-->

This resulted an impressive installation that Buoy group at WHOI, led by Bob Walden, conducted in the fall of 1972. It was a 2-vessel operation. Bob rented a barge from the local government onto which he put the heavy gear. These included the 30,000 ft of cable, the two separate 2-element hydrophone arrays, the anchor, the acoustic release, and the steel float that would keep the array vertical. The second boat, the Gulf Stream, from Nova University in Fort Lauderdale, FL, was used to hold position with the outer end of the cable while the barge paid out enough cable so the whole assembly settled on the bottom. Once the mooring (flotation, riser cable, hydrophones, acoustic release, and anchor) was in place the barge continued to pay out cable as it steamed toward the light house at the northern end of GTI. The cable had two layers of torque-compensated armor protecting the electrical conductors with two additional layers of armor for the last section to be laid across the coral reef zone up onto the beach. 

Bill Richardson’s group at Nova University built the little hut that would house our equipment. I don’t recall why, but we had to arrange for our own power, so we installed a small diesel generator that proved to be very reliable. The four hydrophones were buoyed at 1200 m depth at the sound velocity minimum (SOFAR channel axis) in 1500 m water. The steel flotation sphere was at 200 m depth. While the system was designed to serve at least 18 months for the 1973 MODE program, it continued to serve us well beyond the polyMODE study in 1978. 

Feel free to consult the technical report below for more information. It is a model of how an engineering project should be designed and implemented, the work of first-class professional engineers. This impressive installation was pivotal to the success of the MODE and polyMODE float programs. 

- - - - - -  
Walden, R. G., H. G. Berteaux, and F. Striffler, 1973. The design, logistics and installation of a SOFAR float tracking station at Grand Turk Island, B.W.I.  WHOI Technical Report-73-73. 
 
